# THE SHADOW ECONOMY
The shadow economy is “the market-based production of and payment for legal goods and services that are deliberately concealed from public authorities”.  Also called the underground, informal, or parallel economy, the shadow economy includes not only illegal activities, but also unreported income from the production of legal goods and services, either from monetary or barter transactions. In other words, the shadow economy comprises all economic activities that would generally be taxable were they reported to the tax authorities. 

Underground economies can typically be classified in one or more different ways: 
1.	The illegal economy consists of the income produced by those economic activities pursued in violation of legal statues defining the scope of legitimate forms of commerce. Illegal activities that involve monetary transactions include: trade in stolen goods; drug manufacturing, trafficking, and dealing; prostitution; gambling; smuggling; fraud; human trafficking; and weapons trafficking. 
2.	The unreported economy consists of those economic activities that circumvent or evade the institutionally established fiscal rules as codified in tax code. A summary measure of the unreported economy is the amount of income that should be reported to the tax authority but is not so reported.
3.	The unrecorded economy consists of those economic activities that circumvent the institutional rules that define the reporting requirements of government statistical agencies. A summary measure of the unrecorded economy is the amount of unrecorded income, which represents a discrepancy between total income or output and the actual amount of income or output captured or enumerated by the statistical accounting system designed to measure economic activity.
4.	The informal economy comprises those economic activities that circumvent the costs and are excluded from the benefits and rights incorporated in the laws and administrative rules covering property relationships, commercial licensing, labor contracts, tors, financial credit, and social security systems.

The shadow economy accounts for approximately 16 percent of the global economy; however, developing and transition countries have disproportionally large shadow economies, averaging between 26 and 34 percent of the local economies.

## Why prices continue to increase
Money from the illegal economy has to go somewhere – one cannot pay for everything with or hold an infinite amount of physical currency. Funds from the illegal economy flow to where they are most productive.
For a given market of a product (encompasses all goods and services), demand is the relation of the quantity that all buyers would be prepared to purchase at each unit price. People value products differently than one another. For example, two potential tenants may value an apartment differently – one potential tenant sees $1,500 per month as a value, while the other sees $1,500 as overpriced. While this difference could be for a combination of reasons, generally, high prices will limit most people’s ability to afford a given product.
Prices for legal goods and services should be driven by demand from the legal economy. In this utopic world, all people have legal employment and contribute to economic growth through taxes collected. When people do not 
Participants of the legal economy and illegal economy demand products from the legal economy equally, i.e., every person has the same basic needs (water, food, shelter), which are provided by the legal economy. An increase in demand without a corresponding increase in supply leads to higher prices. These price increases impact more than the demand for expensive items typically thought of ways to store assets (e.g., real estate, art, jewelry). Everyday expenses, such as rent, groceries, and transportation are also affected. Individuals who profit from the illegal economy inflate demand and increase prices every time they introduce illegally obtained funds into the legal economy.
Figure 1: Prices globally are inflated 16 percent on average
 
The economic impact of illegal economy is worsened because most profit from the illegal shadow economy is not taxed appropriately, resulting in reduced income for countries.
